---
layout: post
title: "Editors (Vim)"
date: 2022-01-22 08:00:00 -0800
---

Writing English words and writing code are very different activities. When
programming, you spend more time switching files, reading, navigating, and
editing code compared to writing a long stream. It makes sense that there are
different types of programs for writing English words versus code (e.g.
Microsoft Word versus Visual Studio Code).

As programmers, we spend most of our time editing code, so it's worth investing
time mastering an editor that fits your needs. Here's how you learn a new
editor:

- Start with a tutorial (i.e. this lecture, plus resources that we point out)
- Stick with using the editor for all your text editing needs (even if it slows
  you down initially)
- Look things up as you go: if it seems like there should be a better way to do
  something, there probably is

If you follow the above method, fully committing to using the new program for
all text editing purposes, the timeline for learning a sophisticated text
editor looks like this. In an hour or two, you'll learn basic editor functions
such as opening and editing files, save/quit, and navigating buffers. Once
you're 20 hours in, you should be as fast as you were with your old editor.
After that, the benefits start: you will have enough knowledge and muscle
memory that using the new editor saves you time. Modern text editors are fancy
and powerful tools, so the learning never stops: you'll get even faster as you
learn more.

# Which editor to learn?

Programmers have [strong opinions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Editor_war)
about their text editors.

Which editors are popular today? See this [Stack Overflow
survey](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2019/#development-environments-and-tools)
(there may be some bias because Stack Overflow users may not be representative
of programmers as a whole). [Visual Studio
Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) is the most popular editor.
[Vim](https://www.vim.org/) is the most popular command-line-based editor.

## Vim

The team at Value Based Consulting use Vim as their editor. Vim has a rich
history; it originated from the Vi editor (1976), and it's still being
developed today. Vim has some really neat ideas behind it, and for this reason,
lots of tools support a Vim emulation mode (for example, 1.4 million people
have installed [Vim emulation for VS code](https://github.com/VSCodeVim/Vim)).
Vim is probably worth learning even if you finally end up switching to some
other text editor.

It's not possible to teach all of Vim's functionality in an hour, so we're
going to focus on explaining the philosophy of Vim, teaching you the basics,
showing you some of the more advanced functionality, and giving you the
resources to master the tool.

# Philosophy of Vim

When programming, you spend most of your time reading/editing, not writing. For
this reason, Vim is a _modal_ editor: it has different modes for inserting text
vs manipulating text. Vim is programmable (with Vimscript and also other
languages like Python), and Vim's interface itself is a programming language:
keystrokes (with mnemonic names) are commands, and these commands are
composable. Vim avoids the use of the mouse, because it's too slow; Vim even
avoids using the arrow keys because it requires too much movement.

The end result is an editor that can match the speed at which you think.

# Modal editing

Vim's design is based on the idea that a lot of programmer time is spent
reading, navigating, and making small edits, as opposed to writing long streams
of text. For this reason, Vim has multiple operating modes.

- **Normal**: for moving around a file and making edits
- **Insert**: for inserting text
- **Replace**: for replacing text
- **Visual** (plain, line, or block): for selecting blocks of text
- **Command-line**: for running a command

Keystrokes have different meanings in different operating modes. For example,
the letter `x` in Insert mode will just insert a literal character 'x', but in
Normal mode, it will delete the character under the cursor, and in Visual mode,
it will delete the selection.

In its default configuration, Vim shows the current mode in the bottom left.
The initial/default mode is Normal mode. You'll generally spend most of your
time between Normal mode and Insert mode.

You change modes by pressing `<ESC>` (the escape key) to switch from any mode
back to Normal mode. From Normal mode, enter Insert mode with `i`, Replace mode
with `R`, Visual mode with `v`, Visual Line mode with `V`, Visual Block mode
with `<C-v>` (Ctrl-V, sometimes also written `^V`), and Command-line mode with
`:`.

You use the `<ESC>` key a lot when using Vim: consider remapping Caps Lock to
Escape ([macOS
instructions](https://vim.fandom.com/wiki/Map_caps_lock_to_escape_in_macOS)).

# Basics

## Inserting text

From Normal mode, press `i` to enter Insert mode. Now, Vim behaves like any
other text editor, until you press `<ESC>` to return to Normal mode. This,
along with the basics explained above, are all you need to start editing files
using Vim (though not particularly efficiently, if you're spending all your
time editing from Insert mode).

## Buffers, tabs, and windows

Vim maintains a set of open files, called "buffers". A Vim session has a number
of tabs, each of which has a number of windows (split panes). Each window shows
a single buffer. Unlike other programs you are familiar with, like web
browsers, there is not a 1-to-1 correspondence between buffers and windows;
windows are merely views. A given buffer may be open in _multiple_ windows,
even within the same tab. This can be quite handy, for example, to view two
different parts of a file at the same time.

By default, Vim opens with a single tab, which contains a single window.

## Command-line

Command mode can be entered by typing `:` in Normal mode. Your cursor will jump
to the command line at the bottom of the screen upon pressing `:`. This mode
has many functionalities, including opening, saving, and closing files, and
[quitting Vim](https://twitter.com/iamdevloper/status/435555976687923200).

- `:q` quit (close window)
- `:w` save ("write")
- `:wq` save and quit
- `:e {name of file}` open file for editing
- `:ls` show open buffers
- `:help {topic}` open help
  - `:help :w` opens help for the `:w` command
  - `:help w` opens help for the `w` movement

# Vim's interface is a programming language

The most important idea in Vim is that Vim's interface itself is a programming
language. Keystrokes (with mnemonic names) are commands, and these commands
_compose_. This enables efficient movement and edits, especially once the
commands become muscle memory.

## Movement

You should spend most of your time in Normal mode, using movement commands to
navigate the buffer. Movements in Vim are also called "nouns", because they
refer to chunks of text.

- Basic movement: `hjkl` (left, down, up, right)
- Words: `w` (next word), `b` (beginning of word), `e` (end of word)
- Lines: `0` (beginning of line), `^` (first non-blank character), `$` (end of line)
- Screen: `H` (top of screen), `M` (middle of screen), `L` (bottom of screen)
- Scroll: `Ctrl-u` (up), `Ctrl-d` (down)
- File: `gg` (beginning of file), `G` (end of file)
- Line numbers: `:{number}<CR>` or `{number}G` (line {number})
- Misc: `%` (corresponding item)
- Find: `f{character}`, `t{character}`, `F{character}`, `T{character}`
  - find/to forward/backward {character} on the current line
  - `,` / `;` for navigating matches
- Search: `/{regex}`, `n` / `N` for navigating matches

## Selection

Visual modes:

- Visual: `v`
- Visual Line: `V`
- Visual Block: `Ctrl-v`

Can use movement keys to make selection.

## Edits

Everything that you used to do with the mouse, you now do with the keyboard
using editing commands that compose with movement commands. Here's where Vim's
interface starts to look like a programming language. Vim's editing commands
are also called "verbs", because verbs act on nouns.

- `i` enter Insert mode
  - but for manipulating/deleting text, want to use something more than
    backspace
- `o` / `O` insert line below / above
- `d{motion}` delete {motion}
  - e.g. `dw` is delete word, `d$` is delete to end of line, `d0` is delete
    to beginning of line
- `c{motion}` change {motion}
  - e.g. `cw` is change word
  - like `d{motion}` followed by `i`
- `x` delete character (equal do `dl`)
- `s` substitute character (equal to `xi`)
- Visual mode + manipulation
  - select text, `d` to delete it or `c` to change it
- `u` to undo, `<C-r>` to redo
- `y` to copy / "yank" (some other commands like `d` also copy)
- `p` to paste
- Lots more to learn: e.g. `~` flips the case of a character

## Counts

You can combine nouns and verbs with a count, which will perform a given action
a number of times.

- `3w` move 3 words forward
- `5j` move 5 lines down
- `7dw` delete 7 words

## Modifiers

You can use modifiers to change the meaning of a noun. Some modifiers are `i`,
which means "inner" or "inside", and `a`, which means "around".

- `ci(` change the contents inside the current pair of parentheses
- `ci[` change the contents inside the current pair of square brackets
- `da'` delete a single-quoted string, including the surrounding single quotes

## Demo (magic number shell script)

This is simple script that generates a random number and runs until that random number is 42. It then stops the program and prints some things out. It is a solution to the exercise from our last session. However, there are a few problems with this script that we want to fix:
- We need to add a counter to tell us when it went wrong
- We need to change the random number from 50 to 100

```bash 
#!/usr/bin/env bash  

rnd () {  
n=$(( RANDOM % 50 ))  
  
if [[ n -eq 42 ]]; then  
echo  "Something went wrong on one the line"  
>&2 echo  "The error was using magic numbers"  
exit 1  
fi  
  
  
echo  "Everything went according to plan"  
}  
  
until [[ $? -eq 1 ]]  
do rnd  
done
```

- add a counter c
	- `o` open new line below
	- `3j` skip to line to increment c
	- `O` open new line above to type `c=$((c+1))`
- print out counter c
	- `/plan<CR>` to search and go to the plan line and `w` to move forward a word
	- `$` to skip to the end of the line, then `j` to move over one
	- `i` to enter insert mode and type `- $c run`
	- `6k` to go back to the other line, `b` to go back to the previous word
	- `i` and type `$c `
	- `:w` to save and try it
- change the number from 50 to 100
	- `2k` to move to the line
	- `F5` to find the 5
	- `ciw` to change the 50 to a 100
	- `:w` to save and try it
- could demo other things like
	- copy/paste
	- delete section between brackets
	- move x words forward
	- got to top, middle, and bottom of the file or window


See the lecture video for the demonstration. Compare how the above changes are
made using Vim to how you might make the same edits using another program.
Notice how very few keystrokes are required in Vim, allowing you to edit at the
speed you think.

# Customizing Vim

Vim is customized through a plain-text configuration file in `~/.vimrc`
(containing Vimscript commands). There are probably lots of basic settings that
you want to turn on.

We are providing a well-documented basic config that you can use as a starting
point. We recommend using this because it fixes some of Vim's quirky default
behavior. **Download our config [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/valuebasedconsulting/dataclub/gh-pages/files/vimrc) and save it to
`~/.vimrc`.**

Vim is heavily customizable, and it's worth spending time exploring
customization options. You can look at people's dotfiles on GitHub for
inspiration, for example. There are
lots of good blog posts on this topic too. Try not to copy-and-paste people's
full configuration, but read it, understand it, and take what you need.

# Vim-mode in other programs

Many tools support Vim emulation. The quality varies from good to great;
depending on the tool, it may not support the fancier Vim features, but most
cover the basics pretty well.

## Shell

If you're a Bash user, use `set -o vi`. If you use Zsh, `bindkey -v`. For Fish,
`fish_vi_key_bindings`. Additionally, no matter what shell you use, you can
`export EDITOR=vim`. This is the environment variable used to decide which
editor is launched when a program wants to start an editor. For example, `git`
will use this editor for commit messages.

## Readline

Many programs use the [GNU
Readline](https://tiswww.case.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html) library for
their command-line interface. Readline supports (basic) Vim emulation too,
which can be enabled by adding the following line to the `~/.inputrc` file:

```
set editing-mode vi
```

With this setting, for example, the Python REPL will support Vim bindings.

## Others

There are even vim keybinding extensions for web
[browsers](http://vim.wikia.com/wiki/Vim_key_bindings_for_web_browsers) - some
popular ones are
[Vimium](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/vimium/dbepggeogbaibhgnhhndojpepiihcmeb?hl=en)
for Google Chrome and [Tridactyl](https://github.com/tridactyl/tridactyl) for
Firefox. You can even get Vim bindings in [Jupyter
notebooks](https://github.com/lambdalisue/jupyter-vim-binding).
Here is a [long list](https://reversed.top/2016-08-13/big-list-of-vim-like-software) of software with vim-like keybindings.

# Advanced Vim

Here are a few examples to show you the power of the editor. We can't teach you
all of these kinds of things, but you'll learn them as you go. A good
heuristic: whenever you're using your editor and you think "there must be a
better way of doing this", there probably is: look it up online.

## Search and replace

`:s` (substitute) command ([documentation](http://vim.wikia.com/wiki/Search_and_replace)).

- `%s/foo/bar/g`
  - replace foo with bar globally in file
- `%s/\[.*\](\(.*\))/\1/g`
  - replace named Markdown links with plain URLs

## Multiple windows

- `:sp` / `:vsp` to split windows
- Can have multiple views of the same buffer.

# Resources

- `vimtutor` is a tutorial that comes installed with Vim - if Vim is installed, you should be able to run `vimtutor` from your shell
- [Vim Adventures](https://vim-adventures.com/) is a game to learn Vim
- [Vim Tips Wiki](http://vim.wikia.com/wiki/Vim_Tips_Wiki)
- [Vim Advent Calendar](https://vimways.org/2019/) has various Vim tips
- [Vim Golf](http://www.vimgolf.com/) is [code golf](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_golf), but where the programming language is Vim's UI
- [Vi/Vim Stack Exchange](https://vi.stackexchange.com/)
- [Vim Screencasts](http://vimcasts.org/)
- [Practical Vim](https://pragprog.com/titles/dnvim2/) (book)

# Exercises

1. Complete `vimtutor`. Note: it looks best in a
   [80x24](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VT100) (80 columns by 24 lines)
   terminal window.
1. Download our [basic vimrc](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/valuebasedconsulting/dataclub/gh-pages/files/vimrc) and save it to `~/.vimrc`. Read
   through the well-commented file (using Vim!), and observe how Vim looks and
   behaves slightly differently with the new config.
1. To practice using Vim, re-do the [Demo](#demo) from lecture on your own
   machine.
1. Use Vim for _all_ your text editing for the next month. Whenever something
   seems inefficient, or when you think "there must be a better way", try
   Googling it, there probably is. If you get stuck, come to office hours or
   send us an email.
1. Configure your other tools to use Vim bindings (see instructions above).
1. Further customize your `~/.vimrc`.
